# Categories and patterns of vascular variants											This table lists the categories and patterns of vascular variants. 																						## Columns											- ### Vascular Variant Category 		Indicates the names of the categories, which are based on major developmental pathways linked to modifications at different developmental stages, namely at the procambial, cambial and ectopic cambia levels. Each category includes multiple patterns.  										- ### Category definition	Defines what the category is in a developmental perspective. 											- ### Vascular Variant Pattern 		Indicates the names of the patterns, which described major macro-morphologies derived from specific developmental changes.  										- ### Pattern definition	Defines what the pattern is and its alternative names. 	- ### Functional Pattern	Translate the vascular variant patterns into three major functional categories for ecological and functional studies. This classification is adapted from Kaçamak et al. (2025).	#### Uniform (wood): Secondary xylem is undivided (except for rays) and the circumference is cylindrical or non-cylindrical.  	#### Non-uniform (wood): Secondary xylem is still the main component of the wood cylinder but that possess small amounts of soft tissue derived from the differential activity of a sigle cambium. 	#### Compound (wood): Secondary xylem is divided into independent cylinders, either fragments of one vascular cylinder or multiple vascular cylinders. Phloem and parenchyma (soft tissues) separate compartments of the secondary xylem.	- ### Synonyms	Indicate alternative names used for the vascular variant pattern. 										- ### Notes	Include additional comments related to pattern definition and case studies.																						